--- Cycling ---

Cycling is a wonderful activity which is known to all. Indoor and outdoor cycling are both very popular and both contribute to good health too. Road cycling is a common type of cycling which include cycling on paved roads as well as rugged terrain. Cyclists usually pursue the activity for recreation or see it as a professional sport. Many cyclists perform the activity on mountains by making use of specialized mountain bikes.

Cycling races are also very popular all around the world. In India, cycling is common means of transportation and in present times, is seen majorly as a recreational sport in cities. Cycling is one of the common activities pursued by the youth. Many corporates see it as a way of team building and take their employees on cycling tours.

Sholay Cycling Tour, near Bangalore, in India is a thrilling destination for cyclists. Many cycling tours take place here throughout the year. The tour is enjoyed the most when done in group.

Offbeat cycling tour is yet another tour that offers the cyclists thrill and adventure in the regions surrounding Bangalore city. Passionate cyclists ride through green fields and enjoy the sport to the maximum.

Ramanagaram near Bangalore is also a great place for cyclists. The region is covered with hills from all the sides and provides a great terrain to cycle enthusiasts. Tourists can also indulge in chimney climbing, rock climbing, and trekking here.

For people who are short of time can enjoy cycling at a beautiful spot known as Savandurga. A perfect destination for outdoor activities; the cycling tour here can be availed at a very less price.

--- Kayaking ---

Kayaking is a leisure time sport which takes place on oceans and rivers by making use of specialized boats called kayaks.

Kayaks are boats which have a covered deck and a small place for the rider to sit. The design is such that the rider can keep his legs dry and warm. Kayaks were primarily used in Arctic oceans where the rider needed some protection from cold water. These boats are easy to manoeuvre and can be propelled with a double blade oar.

Kayaking can be done by anybody under a trained supervisor. The rider should know how to swim as it can be needed in case of emergencies. Kayaking tours can be availed through travel agents and companies. Kayaks can be taken on rent too.

Kayaking tours are mostly planned on lakes and oceans where the water is quiet and offers rider, a pleasant and enjoyable experience. Professionals often do kayaking n oceans. Huge waves and currents can make this recreational activity dangerous.

Surf kayaks are also enjoyed by many people. The kayaks are made in such a way that they can be used for surfing boards. Inflatable kayaks are also used at many places and they ensure better safety.

To indulge in kayaking, not much of gear is required. A kayak, life jacket and a paddle is what all a rider needs. Waterproof bags can be taken for kayaking camping trips. Such camps are one of the interesting ways to explore water and enjoy on the river side.

--- Paragliding ---

Every human wants sometime in his life to fly as free as a bird. While most of the people just wish for it, there are many who make it happen by indulging in a recreational adventure sport known as paragliding. The activity is carried on with the support of a paraglide which is a light weighing, easily portable, unique aircraft which soars up high in sky.

The pilot of a paraglide sits on the harness which gets suspended below as wing made of fabric. The shape of the wing is formed by the air pressure which enters through the vents. A paragliding flight can last for several hours and one can cover hundreds of kilometers in just a time frame of one to two hours.

Practiced paragliders usually fly for 3 hours and climb a great elevation.

A paraglider requires not much of equipment. The basic stuff needed to take this flight requires protective helmet, a nylon outfit which is specially designed for paragliding and sturdy laced boots.

A paragliding enthusiast can avail paragliding tours in India at many destinations. Some of the top ones being:

    Panchgani and Sinhagad in Maharashtra
    Chamundi Hills and Nandi Hills in Karnataka
    Nilgiri Hills in Ooty
    Manali and Bilaspur in Himachal Pradesh
    Shilling in Meghalaya

Paragliding enthusiasts doing the activity for the first time should pursue it under the supervision of trained guide. If necessary, one can learn the skill for different paragliding schools based in different parts of India.

--- Rafting ---

White water rafting, commonly known as rafting, is an excitement filled adventure activity which is quite popular among adventure enthusiasts. This fun filled water activity makes use of inflatable raft which is used for navigating on a water body having windy current. Rafting is usually done on a river.

Rafting can be done by anybody who is over the age of 12 years. However, it is not recommended for people who have fear of water, blood pressure issues, and heart problems or have breathing problems. It is recommended to pursue the activity under a supervisor or a rafting coach. The coach or supervisor can guide the first time rafter as well as experienced rafter in best possible way and also ensure water rescue in case of any emergency.

While pursuing rafting, one needs to make use of different type of safety gears. Some of them are –rafts, kayaks, inflatable rafts etc. There is a variety of rafting gear and equipment available in the market these days and one can use them accordingly.

It is advisable to select the rafting gear depending upon the time of the year, weather and water temperature. Cotton gears should be avoided as on getting water drenched, they make the body feel colder. Similarly, sandals are not recommended rather old tennis or running shoes should be worn. If the water temperature is high, then shorts and T shirt can be worn.

Rafting is an adventurous sport, however, the fun is sometime spoiled if not enough care is taken while doing the activity. Sunburns are typically one of the major problems faced by rafters. It is advised therefore to make use of effective sunscreen.

Rafting in India is popular in Rishikesh, Dubare, Bheemeshwari, Zanskar, Spiti, Alaknanda and Kameng River.

--- Rock Climbing ---

There are many people who like to achieve new heights every day. However, these heights usually differ from person to person. The adventure lot often refers to it for carrying out some unique activities. Rock climbing is one of them.

Rock climbing is a sport which involves climbing of rocks. This sport is usually thought of being an outdoor sport; however, with changing times and modern inventions, this can be pursued even indoors. Although indoor and outdoor climbing differs in terms of adventure involved, the benefits derived from both are more or less same.

Some of the benefits one can draw from rock climbing include strength building, increased endurance, body flexibility, and mental peace. Consistent climbers also gain self-confidence through this activity.

One of the benefits of pursuing indoor rock climbing is that it can be carried on for whole year without getting affected by weather or any other situation.

India offers number of destinations for enjoying rock climbing. One can book rock climbing tours as per his budget and convenience. Listed below are some of the hot spots for rock climbing in India:

Great Himalayan National Park – If one wants to have an exciting experience of rock climbing, then Great Himalayan National Park is a place to be. The pristine mountains and serene landscape makes it an amazing destination where one can enjoy many other activities like trekking, fishing, bird watching and nature walking too.

Munnar – Munnar in Kerala is an exotic destination of India which experiences many tourists every year. One can indulge here in many activities like rock climbing, trekking, tree climbing etc.

--- Scuba Diving ---

Scuba diving is water adventure which provides people an opportunity to witness life below water in water bodies such as lakes, seas and oceans. The word Scuba is an abbreviation for ‘Self contained Underwater Breathing apparatus’. The divers who dive into water bodies wear the equipment that lets them breathe under water and stay inside for longer periods.

India, as a country, offers many scuba diving spots. Tourists from foreign countries visit India to indulge in this recreational activity and also to explore pristine ocean waters.

Here are some of the known scuba diving spots in India:

Goa- Goa is the smallest state in India which is immensely popular among tourists for its beaches and churches. Scuba diving is also one of the major attractions of Goa. Scuba divers in Goa get to access the vast corals of Arabian Sea and also witness a huge variety of shipwrecks. October to May is the best season for scuba diving in Goa.

Andaman – Andaman is known to be one of the best spots for scuba diving. Divers here usually experience rich schools of fish, abundant coral reefs, and amazing underwater views. The best season for scuba diving here is between November to April with February and March being the best time.

Lakshadweep – Lakshadweep is an archipelago lying 200 kms away from southern western coast of India. The underwater world is beautiful here with lush reef, swim through, and variety of fish.

Pondicherry – Many Indians visit Pondicherry to get a feel of International holidays. Located on the eastern Indian coast, Pondicherry offers large reefs, shipwrecks, schools of diverse fish. Reaching out Pondicherry from Bangalore and Chennai is easy and does not take more than a few hours. The best time for scuba diving in Pondicherry is between January to May and September to November.

--- Trekking ---

Trekking is recreational activity that involves covering any specified journey on foot. This is mostly done in rural areas and rugged regions. Trekking is often done in combination with backpacking and rock climbing.

Trekking is mainly done to have an interaction with nature. Trekkers cross forest areas, mountains, deserts and face different weather conditions and topographies. The activity does not require much of planning and is usually done in groups. The travelling through isolated areas by being close to nature and surroundings; makes this activity enjoyable and worth an experience.

Trekking can be done in any part of world, although, there are some regions where it is carried out extensively.

In India, trekking is mainly done in Western Himalayas and Eastern Himalayas. The western region consists of Jammu and Kashmir, Uttaranchal and Himachal Pradesh, while Darjeeling, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh and West Bengal are covered in Eastern Himalayan region. Down south, trekking is popular in Coorg, Chikamagalur and Kerala.

The best time to undertake trekking In India is between May and October months. The treks in Ladakh region are usually done between July- August and then from September to October. For trekkers, who want to explore parts of Sikkim and Darjeeling, the best time is between May to October. The trekking season for Arunachal Pradesh starts in October and ends in February.

Many trek routes in India go through the sensitive areas declared by Indian Government. The Non-Indian trekkers need to have proper trekking licenses and permits to cross such area.

--- Bungee Jumping ---

Bungee jumping, also spelled bungy jumping, is an activity that involves a person jumping from a great height while connected to a large elastic cord. The launching pad is usually erected on a tall structure such as a building or crane, a bridge across a deep ravine, or on a natural geographic feature such as a cliff. It is also possible to jump from a type of aircraft that has the ability to hover above the ground, such as a hot-air-balloon or helicopter. The thrill comes from the free-falling and the rebound.[1] When the person jumps, the cord stretches and the jumper flies upwards again as the cord recoils, and continues to oscillate up and down until all the kinetic energy is dissipated.

--- Camping ---

Camping is an outdoor activity involving overnight stays away from home, either without shelter or using basic shelter such as a tent or a recreational vehicle. Typically participants leave developed areas to spend time outdoors in more natural ones in pursuit of activities providing them enjoyment or an educational experience. The night (or more) spent outdoors distinguishes camping from day-tripping, picnicking, and other similarly short-term recreational activities.

Camping as a recreational activity became popular among elites in the early 20th century. With time, it grew in popularity among other socioeconomic classes. Modern campers frequent publicly owned natural resources such as national and state parks, wilderness areas, and commercial campgrounds. In a few countries, such as Sweden and Scotland, public camping is legal on privately-held land as well. Camping is a key part of many youth organizations around the world, such as Scouting, which use it to teach both self-reliance and teamwork.

--- Canyoning ---

Canyoning (canyoneering in the United States, kloofing in South Africa) is travelling in canyons using a variety of techniques that may include other outdoor activities such as walking, scrambling, climbing, jumping, abseiling (rappelling), and swimming.

Although non-technical descents such as hiking down a canyon (canyon hiking) are often referred to as canyoneering, the terms canyoning and canyoneering are more often associated with technical descents — those that require abseils (rappels) and ropework, technical climbing or down-climbing, technical jumps, and/or technical swims.

Canyoning is frequently done in remote and rugged settings and often requires navigational, route-finding, and other wilderness travel skills.

Canyons that are ideal for canyoning are often cut into the bedrock stone, forming narrow gorges with numerous drops, beautifully sculpted walls, and sometimes spectacular waterfalls. Most canyons are cut into limestone, sandstone, granite, or basalt, though other rock types are found. Canyons can be very easy or extremely difficult, though emphasis in the sport is usually on aesthetics and fun rather than pure difficulty. A wide variety of canyoning routes are found throughout the world, and canyoning is enjoyed by people of all ages and skill levels.

Canyoning gear includes climbing hardware, static or semi-static ropes, helmets, wetsuits, and specially designed shoes, packs, and rope bags. While canyoneers have used and adapted climbing, hiking, and river running gear for years, more and more specialized gear is invented and manufactured as canyoning popularity increases. 

--- Hiking ---

Hiking is a long, vigorous walk, usually on trails or footpaths in the countryside. Walking for pleasure developed in Europe during the eighteenth century.[1] Religious pilgrimages have existed much longer but they involve walking long distances for a spiritual purpose associated with specific religions.

"Hiking" is the preferred term in Canada and the United States; the term "walking" is used in these regions for shorter, particularly urban walks. In the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, the word "walking" describes all forms of walking, whether it is a walk in the park or backpacking in the Alps. The word hiking is also often used in the UK, along with rambling (a slightly old-fashioned term), hillwalking, and fell walking (a term mostly used for hillwalking in northern England). The term bushwalking is endemic to Australia, having been adopted by the Sydney Bush Walkers club in 1927.[2] In New Zealand a long, vigorous walk or hike is called tramping.[3] It is a popular activity with numerous hiking organizations worldwide, and studies suggest that all forms of walking have health benefits.

--- Skiing ---

Skiing is the use of skis to glide on snow. Variations of purpose include basic transport, a recreational activity, or a competitive winter sport. Many types of competitive skiing events are recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC), and the International Ski Federation (FIS).

--- Surfing ---

Surfing is a surface water sport in which an individual, a surfer (or two in tandem surfing), uses a board to ride on the forward section, or face, of a moving wave of water, which usually carries the surfer towards the shore. Waves suitable for surfing are primarily found on ocean shores, but can also be found in standing waves in the open ocean, in lakes, in rivers in the form of a tidal bore, or in wave pools.

The term surfing refers to a person riding a wave using a board, regardless of the stance. There are several types of boards. The Moche of Peru would often surf on reed craft, while the native peoples of the Pacific surfed waves on alaia, paipo, and other such water craft. Ancient cultures often surfed on their belly and knees, while the modern-day definition of surfing most often refers to a surfer riding a wave standing on a surfboard; this is also referred to as stand-up surfing. 

--- Zorbing ---

Zorbing (also known as globe-riding, sphereing, orbing) is the recreation or sport of rolling downhill inside an orb, typically made of transparent plastic.[1] Zorbing is generally performed on a gentle slope but can also be done on a level surface, permitting more rider control. In the absence of hills, some operators have constructed inflatable, wooden, or metal ramps. Due to the buoyant nature of the orbs, Zorbing can also be carried out on water, provided the orb is inflated properly and sealed once the rider is inside. "Water walking" using such orbs has become popular in theme parks across the UK.[2]

There are two types of orbs: harnessed and non-harnessed. Non-harnessed orbs carry up to three riders, while the harnessed orbs are constructed for one to two riders. The first zorbing site was established in Rotorua, New Zealand, by ZORB Ltd.